>> Richard Feldman: Let's talk about
some of the costs that Elm has.
Number one it's learning
a new programming language.
If you have a team of people who already
know and are comfortable with JavaScript
learning a new programming language is of
course a cost of using this technology.
And it's more work to learn a programming
language than it is to learn a library,
a framework, something like that
because there's more there.
There's also a smaller ecosystem.
So, in the same way that Ruby has it's
own package ecosystem, Python has it's
own package ecosystem, Java has it's own
package ecosystem, JavaScript does too.
Elm also has it's own package
ecosystem that's totally separate
from the JavaScript package ecosystem.
Now it's a really nice ecosystem we'll see
some of the really nice characteristics
that come from having a separate
ecosystem but it is a lot smaller, right.
MPM is the biggest packaged
ecosystem in the world
there's everything you could
possibly imagine on there.
The same is not true of Elm's ecosystem.
And finally, fewer Web APIs have
first-class support than JavaScript.
Anytime the browser introduces a new
web API, like audio, video recording,
stuff like that,
JavaScript has support for it on day one,
as soon as browser's implemented,
JavaScript has support for it.
Whereas Elm has to sorta implement
that on top of the JavaScript API, so
there's a period of lag there.
So if you want the absolute most
bleeding edge stuff, you're always gonna
have that in JavaScript,
you're not always gonna have that in Elm.
So not all the web APIs that are currently
out there, are covered by Elm, and
that’s always going to be true,
to some extent, no matter what.
Okay, so, given those costs,
why are companies choosing Elm,
what are the benefits that
they are getting out of this?
So I'm gonna talk about three things.
One, is measurable technical advantages.
Two is it makes hiring easier, this is a
counter intuitive result for most people.
And three is, it's cohesive,
high-quality ecosystem.
So we'll talk about each of these.
So first of all measurable technical
advantages, one is bundle size.
So this is something that's becoming
increasingly important to a lot
of companies as single page
applications become more and
more common as the way that people are
deploying their front-end applications.
So we've got a lot of popular frameworks,
React, Angular, Vue, Ember,
things like that.
And then we've got some of the ones that
are sort of focused on smaller bundle
size, like Preact, Svelte, or
even just writing raw JavaScript and
Elm competes with the bottom row here.
Elm is sort of a competitor to Preact,
and Svelte and
just plain JavaScript in terms
of bundle sizes, it's much,
much smaller than what you get with React,
Angular, Vue, or Ember.
One of the differences,
though, as we'll see,
Elm isn't sacrificing productivity to
get those gains, in fact, it's got
quite a bit of productivity improvements
compared to, arguably, any of these.
The way that Elm's able to achieve
these smaller bundle sizes is the fact,
that it's a separate programming language,
it get's to play by separate rules,
different rules than JavaScript does.
Another is in terms of reliability.
So this is a graph of our production
run time exceptions between 2015 and
2018, which is when we've
been using Elm in production.
So we have roll bar which detects
whenever our front end code crashes.
[COUGH] This is a graph of the exceptions
that it's logged over that period of time.
So JavaScript is about 60,000-ish and
Elm this is the end of the graph.
There actually, it has happened, for
a long time we had zero but eventually,
despite Elm's sort of goal of no runtime
exceptions, we did actually hit one.
It was a very sad day, but it's not enough
to actually put a pixel on the graph, so
it's not literally zero but
it is negligible.
Also worth noting that the thing
that actually caused the crash,
no longer exists in the language.
So it would no longer be possible
today [LAUGH] and we'd be,
still have a completely unblemished
record if not for that one thing.
So this is something that,
depending on who you ask,
either sounds unbelievable
like there's some sorta trick.
Like it must be swallowing errors or
it must be doing something else that's not
quite exceptions but is essentially
the same thing as exceptions.
But as experienced Elm programmers will
tell you, no it's just that the compiler
catches them all at compile time and
tells you about them.
And as we'll see over the course of
the workshop, it's really difficult
to accidentally cause a production
runtime exception in Elm.
Onboarding, this is something else
that people seem to worry about but
we've had the experience of hiring people
straight out of a JavaScript boot camp,
and having this be essentially their
first professional programming job ever.
And they're writing production Elm in
their first week of their first job as
a programmer.
We haven't seen that be a problem and
I don't think that other companies
have either, from what I've heard.
And finally, we come to the ecosystem, so
the sort of the ecosystem advantage that,
Elm has.
So in JavaScript, let's say I'm
starting a new JavaScript project, and
I start off with, yes, I'm going to use
JavaScript for this project, and I think
I wanna be compatible with older browser,
so maybe I'm gonna introduce Babel.
And I think actually,
I might want some type checking so
maybe I'm gonna get TypeScript
involve although there's also Flow,
which seems to be less popular than
TypeScript, but Facebook uses it.
Facebook has a big,
high quality engineering team,
so maybe I should look into that first.
So it's not just that
you choose JavaScript,
it's that you have to pick
a particular dialect of JavaScript,
then once you've got your dialect set,
okay well, I'm gonna need to build my UI.
It's pretty uncommon to build UIs
just using vanilla JavaScript, so
I'll think about something like, okay,
maybe I'll use Angular or React or
ViewJS or Amber, one of these different
technologies to handle my View Logic.
Then I think I want a state
management solution for my apps, say,
because a lot of these
aren't concerned with that.
They don't come with an app state
management solution out the box so
maybe I'm gonna get into something
like Redux, MobX or Relay or
maybe I'll go the Observables route.
And then I think okay, well, that's
interesting although Redux and TypeScript,
do they necessarily play well together?
[SOUND] Okay, well,
we'll deal with that when we come to it.
But then I gotta think about async and
I like, okay,
well maybe I wanna do like redux-sagas or
redux-thunks or redux-promises.
Or maybe redux-bservables because I don't
necessarily need to use observables for
async, even though I may or
may not be using them for state.
And then I think I got utility
functions like maybe I want lodash,
maybe I want jQuery, Immutable JS, Ramda.
All of these are different alternatives
that may or may not mix and match well.
If I'm using jQuery,
is that gonna work super with React?
Not really designed to work together,
Immutable JS may be a better fit.
Maybe jQuery has some stuff that I like,
kinda old school and
familiar and Immutable JS and Redux,
a lot of those play together.
And then I want some third party packages,
so I'm gonna use MPM or
Yarn which is built on top of MPM but
it's different CLI.
And then maybe I want dependently type so
that I can get TypeScript binding.
So that doesn't necessarily play well with
flow but if I show slow then I can get
flow type but that doesn't necessarily
play well with TypeScripts.
And then finally I have ES6 modules which
if I want tree shaking I get ES6 modules
but not all these packages use ES6 so
maybe the tree shaking is or
isn't gonna work.
Okay, so this is a lot of stuff and
these things compound on one another.
And deciding to build a new project in
JavaScript involves making a lot of
decisions and accepting that not all
the decisions you make are going to be
compatible with one another.
In contrast, in Elm,
there's one dialect that's called Elm.
There's no stack for
building different variants of Elm,
there's just Elm that's it
that's what everyone uses.
In terms of UI, you have a view function,
that's it, that's all there is.
In terms of state,
you have a thing called model, that's it.
Async is all done with update.
Utilities?
Elm ships with immutable functional core
libraries, and that's what everyone uses.
As far as packages,
there's a package manager built in,
you just use Elm install, and
every package in the entire Elm ecosystem
follows all of these things and they
all work really, really well together.
And all of these concepts are things
that are true for every Elm application,
every Elm package in the entire ecosystem
and we're gonna learn all of them today.
So, to sum up, so the reason that
companies are choosing Elm is number one,
a cohesive ecosystem.
Number two, it is fast,
it has a nice performance.
It is reliable, no runtime exceptions.
Tiny, tiny assets and of course,
no semicolon debates.
Arguably the biggest benefit of all.